## Definitions and examples

### Positive, negative and full orbit

The _map_ or _discrete dynamical system_ is defined by an iteration. We define $x_i \in \Omega \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n,$ and the iteration $f:\Omega \rightarrow \Omega$ such that:

\begin{displaymath}
x_{i+1} = f(x_i).
\end{displaymath}

Thus, 

\begin{displaymath}
x_{i} = \underbrace{f \circ f \circ f \ldots \circ f}_{i\text{ times, noted }f^i} (x_0).
\end{displaymath}

\def\plus{+}

\bd{Positive orbit}
The _positive_ orbit of $x\in\Omega$, noted $\theta^\plus(x)$ is defined by $\theta^\plus(x)=\{f^i(x) | i\geq 0\}$. 
\ed

If $f$ is invertible, then one can go backwards using $f^{-1}$. One can then define the negative orbit and the full orbit:


\bd{Negative and full orbit}

- The _negative_ orbit of $x\in\Omega$, noted $\theta^{-}(x)$ is defined by $\theta^\plus(x)=\{f^{-i}(x) | i\geq 0\}$; 
- The _full orbit of $x\in\Omega$, noted $\theta(x)$ is defined by $\theta^\plus(x)=\{f^{-i}(x) | i\in\mathbb{Z}\}$. 

\ed

### The logistic growth

A simple model for, e.g., demographic growth is defined as $f(x)=r x$. Quite obviously the positive orbits diverge to $+\infty$ for positive $r$ ($\lambda = r$). The idea of _limiting growth_ by a competition or limiting resource argument bringing a demographic limitation is the basis of the _logistic growth_ model:
\begin{displaymath}
f(x) = rx (1-\frac{x}{N}), 
\end{displaymath}

or, rescaling the population mass by $N$, $f(x) = rx (1-x)$. 

This _logistic_ equation can be interpreted as a _discrete_ version of the Verhulst model for population growth, developed under the influence of Adolphe Quetelet (both Belgian Mathematicians). Its behaviour can be surprisingly complex depending on the value of $a$ and we will explore some of it later on. 

The Cobweb construction provides a insightful approach to construct the orbits. It consists in iterating using by reporting the iteration $x_{i+1}$, found on the $y-$axis, to the $x-$axis using the $x_{i}=x_{i+1}$ line. 


\Jupyterimport{Logistic_Cobweb} 

We have here an example ($r=3.2$) where the map converges to a limit cycle attractor. For low-enough $r$, the attractor is a fixed point; for high $r$, the solution is a-periodic and chaotic (will still need to define chaos in this case). These behaviours can be visualised with the so-called _orbit diagram_, which may be understood as the equivalent of the bifurcation diagram in the continuous domain. 

\Jupyterimport{Logistic_orbit}

The orbit map of the logistic model is a _fractal_ : it reproduces itself by zooming over it again and again. 

### The tent map

The tent map is defined as

\mbox{
\begin{minipage}[t]{8cm}
\begin{equation}
x_{i+1}=
\begin{cases}
2 x_{i}\text{ for } x_i < \frac{1}{2}, \\
1 - 2x_i\text{, otherwise} \\
\end{cases}
\end{equation} 
\end{minipage}}\hfill\mbox{
\begin{tikzpicture}[scale=4, baseline=(current bounding box.north)]
\draw[->](0,0) -- (1.2,0) node [label=right:$x_i$] {}; 
\draw[->](0,0) -- (0,1.0) node [label=above:$x_{i+1}$] {}; 

\draw[-, thick] (0,0) -- (0.5,1) -- (1,0);
\draw[-, dashed] (0,0) -- (1,1) node [label=right:{$x_i=x_{i+1}$}] {};
\end{tikzpicture}}

\bcd
By reasoning in base 2 (as computers do), one can see that the tent map produces _periodic_ solutions for all rational numbers, and _aperiodic_ solutions for all irrational initial conditions. For that reason, computing the tent map with a digital computer gives you almost surely the wrong solution, because $\mathbb{Q}$ is a set of measure zero in $\mathbb{R}$. _Hint_: multiplying by 2 in base 2 is shifting all numbers by one on the right.
\ecd


### Getting iterations from continuous dynamical systems

It is common to map a continuous dynamical system on an iteration to understand its properties, at the cost of some information loss:

- _Numerical iteration_ is perhaps the most common case. The _Euler_, _Runge Kutta_ schemes are example of iterations extracted from a continuous dynamical system. 
- The _Poincaré_ map is the cross section of a n-dimensional continuous orbit onto a lower-dimensional section, typically a plane. For example, the Poincaré map of a limit cycle is a point; that of a torus: a circle. 
- The _stroboscopic map_ is obtained as the sample of a continuous orbit at fixed intervals $T$. It is particularly usefuf to study synchronisation in forced  systems with period $T$.  
- In some cases, authors have been more creative. We have seen how Lorenz interpreted the behaviour Saltzman-Lorenz by plotting successive local maxima in the $z-$coordinate with the tent map. We comen now to another example.

### The Hénon map

The Hénon map (Michel Hénon, Communications in Mathematical Physics, 1976) was introduced as a minimalist dynamical system presenting a strange attractor, reminiscent of a cross section of the Lorenz system. 

\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
x_{i+1} &= 1 - a x_i^2 + y_i,  \\
y_{i+1} &= b x_i.
\end{split}
\end{equation}

\Jupyterimport{Henon}

The _strange_ character of the attractor is related to the fact the way the number of pixels you need to cover it scales with the dimensions of the pixels. 

For a example, for a line segment, the number of pixels growth linearly the inverse of the size of the pixels. The dimension is 1. 

For a square or a rectangle, the nuber of pixels needed growth with the _square_ of the inverse of the size of the pixels. Dimension is 2. 

The _Hausdorff_ dimension quantifies this scale relationship. 

In the Hénon attractor, this number is about 1.261. This is _strange_ in that sense. 
