## The van der Pol oscillator 

\label{lab:periodic}

Consider the following dynamical system.

\begin{align*}
 \dot{x} &=  y \\
 \dot{y} &= \alpha ( y - y^3/3 - x )
\end{align*}

We consider first the regime $\alpha \gg 1$ (in the illustration below, we have used $\alpha = 10$). Defining $\varepsilon = 1 / \alpha$, it is equivalent to write the second equation:

\begin{displaymath}
 \varepsilon \dot{y} =  ( y - y^3/3 - x ),
\end{displaymath}

In the limit of small $\varepsilon$ the left-hand-side term vanishes, so that, to first approximation, $y$ behaves such as to satisfy the diagnostic equation $y - y^3/3 - x = 0$. This equation defines the nullcline. For any reasonable value of $x$, $y$ will run such as to satisfy this equation. 

Hence, to get a first grasp on this system, we may consider that $x$ varies slowly, and $y$ equilibrates with respect to a slowly varying $x$, which effectively behaves as a parameter. We then recognise a first-order differential equation with, as we will show, two fold bifurcations with respect to $x$. 
\
Indeed, the equation $y - y^3/3 - x = 0$ has three roots for $-1 \leq x \leq 1$, and only one out of this interval. Within the three-root regimes, the middle root corresponds to an unstable equilibrium and the upper and lower branches correspond to sinks of this fast system. Again, view $x$ as a parameter, and one will find two fold bifurcations for $x=\pm 1$. 

Suppose that $x=0$ and that the system is on the upper branch. The fast variable $y$ is positive, and because of the first equation of the full system ($\dot x = y$), $x$ must increase slowly. The fast variable $y$ keep tracking the upper branch, until it reaches the fold bifurcation. At this point $y$ runs away (it has lost its equilibrium), until it falls on the lower branch. Then $y<0$, and $x$ reverses direction. The fast variable $y$ tracks the lower branch, until, again, it finds a fold bifurcation. 
We have just found an example of attractor that is a limit cycle, characteristic of a slow-fast _relaxation_ oscillator. 

It is a _stable_ limit cycle in the sense that it is a periodic orbit, that is reached _asymptotically_ as time moves forward, and which effectively acts (and is) an attractor. 

The limit cycle persists outside the slow-fast regime, and $y$ then moves more softly from negative to positive values. 

\input{Figures/vanderpol.eepic}
\input{Figures/vanderpol_01.eepic}


## Bendixson's criterion

Consider again our classical diffeomorphism on the plane:

\begin{equation} \label{eq:ddb}
\begin{split}
\dot x &= f(x,y), \\
\dot y &= g(x,y),\quad 
\text{with $f$ and $g$ at least $\mathbf{C}^1$}:
\end{split}
\end{equation}

\bd{Periodic orbit}
A solution of \eqref{eq:ddb} through the point $x_0$ is said to be periodic of period $T$ if there exists $T > 0$ such that $x(t)=x(t+T)$ (assuming the initial condition $x_0$), which is equivalent to saying $\phi^T(x)=x$ on this orbit. 
\ed


\bt{Bendixson's criterion}
If, on a simply connected region $\mathcal{D}\subset \mathbb{R}^2$,  the expression $\pd{f}{x}+\pd{g}{y}:=\div{(f,g)}$ is not identically zero and does not change sign, then the system has no closed orbit lying entirely in $\mathcal{D}$.
\et

This can be proved as a consequences of Green's theorem on the plane. 
Assume an orbit with contour $\Gamma$ actually exists in the domain $\mathcal{D}$. 

Note then that the path integral $\int_\Gamma f\dif y - g\dif x = 0$:

\begin{equation*}
   \oint_\Gamma f\dif y - g\dif x =  \int_0^T (f \dot y - g \dot x) \dif t  =  \int_0^T (fg - gf) \dif t = 0. 
\end{equation*}

On the other hand, because of the divergence theorem [^green]

\begin{displaymath}
 \oint_\Gamma \hat{\mathbf{n}}\cdot (f,g) \dif s = \int_\mathcal{S}\left( \pd{f}{x} + \pd{g}{y} \right) \dif \mathcal{S}, 
\end{displaymath}

where $\hat{\mathbf{n}}$ is the normalised, outward pointing vector orthogonal to the path. 

[^green]: The  equivalent approach is to simply consider Green's theorem that states that $\oint_\Gamma \pd{f}{y}- \pd{g}{x}\,\dif s = \int_\mathcal{S}\left( \pd{f}{x} + \pd{g}{y}\right) \dif \mathcal{S}$. 

The left-hand-side term is the contour integral we just computed (you must use: $\hat {\mathbf{n}} \dif s = (\dif y, -\dif x)$).  It is zero. The second term can only be zero if the divergence is either identically null, or changes sign. \eop

The Bendixson theorem can be generalised so that is also works by monitoring $\pd{(Bf)}{x}+\pd{(Bg)}{y}$ for any $B(x,y)$ of class $\mathbf{C}^1$. The generalisation is due to Henri Dulac. 

\bcd
Check that the Duffing oscillator

\begin{displaymath}
\spalignsys{
\dot{x} = y\text{,}; 
\dot{y} = x - x^3 - \gamma y} 
\end{displaymath}
 
has no closed orbit for $\gamma \neq 0$. 
\ecd 

The next example (taken form Wiggins, sect. 4.1) shows how the Bendixson' criterion allows us to restrict regions in the plane where closed orbits _might_ exist. Consider this modification of the Duffing oscillator: 


\begin{displaymath}
\spalignsys{
 \dot{x} =  y;
 \dot{y} = x - x^3 - \gamma y + x^2 y\text{, \quad} \gamma \geq 0.  
}
\end{displaymath}

The equation has three fixed points at $(x,y)=(0,0)$, $(\pm 1,0)$, with the eigenvalues $\lambda_{1,2}$ given by the following expressions: 

\begin{align*}
  (0,0)  & \Rightarrow \lambda_{1,2} = \frac{-\gamma}{2} \pm \frac{1}{2} \sqrt{\gamma^2 + 4},  \\  
  (1,0)  & \Rightarrow \lambda_{1,2} = \frac{-\gamma + 1 }{2} \pm \frac{1}{2} \sqrt{(-\gamma+1)^2 - 8},  \\  
  (-1,0) & \Rightarrow \lambda_{1,2} = \frac{-\gamma + 1 }{2} \pm \frac{1}{2} \sqrt{(-\gamma+1)^2 - 8}.  \\  
\end{align*}

Thus, $(0,0)$ is a saddle, and $(\pm 1,0)$ are sinks for $\gamma > 1$ and sources for $0 \leq \gamma < 1$. Furthermore, we find 

\begin{displaymath}
 \pd{f}{x} + \pd{g}{y} = -\gamma + x^2. 
\end{displaymath}

Thus, the divergence vanishes on the lines $x = \pm \sqrt{\gamma}$. These two lines divide the plane into three regions which we label $R_1$, $R_2$ and $R_3$. We cannot have any closed orbit in this regions, but we _cannot_ rule out orbits which would overlap these regions. 

It is possible to restrict the possibilities further with the _index theory_ but at this point of writing the notes, it is not yet clear we have time to cover this theory in the context of this course. 


## The Hopf bifurcation

We will now explore _one_ mechanism by which orbits emerge. Consider again the van der Pol oscillator, in the regular regime (not slow fast), but with an extra bifurcation parameter called here $\beta$ (and $\alpha = 1$): 

\begin{align*}
 \dot{x} &=  y - \beta\\
 \dot{y} &=  ( y - y^3/3 - x )
\end{align*}

We study the stability of the fixed point $(\beta - \beta^3 /3, \beta)$ with the Jacobian:

\begin{displaymath}
  D_{f,g}(\beta, \beta - \beta^3) = \begin{pmatrix}
    0&1\\-1&1-\beta^2 \end{pmatrix}
\end{displaymath}

which admits, as eigenvalues

\begin{displaymath}
  \lambda_\pm= \frac{1-\beta^2\pm\sqrt{\beta^4-2\beta^2-3}}{2};
\end{displaymath}

as we see it, the real part of the eigenvalues vanish for $\beta=\pm 1$, at which point $\lambda_\pm=\pm i$. 


In summary, we have three regimes:

- for $|\beta| \geq \sqrt{3}$: two negative, real eigenvalues;
- for $1 < |\beta| \leq \sqrt{3}$: two complex-conjugate eigenvalues with negative real part;
- for $|\beta| < 1$: two complex-conjugate eigenvalues with positive real part. 

The fixed point is a source in the third regime, which generates trajectories spiraling outwards, and reaching the limit cycle described in the first section. 

The transition from negative to positive real values with imaginary parts is the signature of a Hopf (or Andronov-Hopf) bifurcation. 

Rushing through the theory, it may be shown that if some generic non-degeneracy conditions are met (specifically, the first Lyapunov exponent near the limit cycle is non-zero \footnote{but we haven't defined it, yet; no panic}, and the derivative of the real part of the eigenvalue is non-zero at the equilibrium), it may be shown that systems with a Hopf bifurcation are locally topologically equivalent to the following normal form, with $\sigma$ either equal to $1$ or $-1$ (topological equivalence may imply a rescaling of time):

\begin{align*}
  \dot x &= \beta x - y + \sigma x ( x^2 + y^2) \\
  \dot y &= x + \beta y + \sigma y ( x^2 + y^2) \\
\end{align*}


The bifurcation is found at $\beta=0$. 

The system of equations may be rewritten in polar coordinates, in which case we find

\begin{align*}
  \dot r &= \beta r + \sigma r^3,  \\
  \dot \theta &= 1. 
\end{align*}

The equation for $r$ is the normal form for the pitchfork bifurcation on the line. 
Consider first the trivial fixed point for $r$, $r=0$. It is stable for $\beta<0$. 
The zero fixed point is stable for $\beta<0$.
The radius $r$ admits a second fixed point when the sign of $\sigma$ and $\beta$ are opposite to each other. 

- ( $\sigma = 1$) : In the _supercritical_ bifurcation, on finds a stable limit cycle (fixed point for $r$) for positive values of $\beta$, and growing as ($\sqrt \beta$). In other words, the limit cycle grows from zero and reaches a finite amplitude as $\beta$ increases. 

- ( $\sigma = 1$) :  In the  _subcritical_, an _unstable_ limit cycle exists in the negative domain of $\beta$, and then disappears as $\beta$ is positive. That is, for positive $\beta$, the only invariant form is the unstable fixed point. 

As we see it, the Hopf bifurcation is a _local_ mechanism for the generation of a limit cycle. It is local, because it emerges out of the loss of (local) stability of a fixed point. The imaginary part of the eigenvalue are finite, so that the new born orbit, near the bifurcation point, is generally associated with a finite period. It will definitely be associated with a finite period if the bifurcation is supercritical; what happens with a subcritical bifurcation is less certain because the system moves out of the domain of fixed point. What happens is not predicted by the normal form: higher order terms must be taken into account. It may land on a fixed point or, more likely, on another limit cycle.  A typical scenario is obtained when the unstable limit cycle for negative $\beta$ regains stability and continues towards positive values of $\beta$, in which case the period of the stable limit cycle is often not very different from that of the unstable limite cycle near the bifurcation point. 

For example, a fifth-order term, such as:
\begin{align*}
  \dot r &= \beta r +  r^3 - r^5  \\
\end{align*}

will generate, in addition to the trivial $r=0$ and keeping only positive, real $r$, the solutions $r=\frac{1}{\sqrt 2}\sqrt(1\pm\sqrt{4\beta+1})$, that is, 2 solutions for $-\frac{1}{4}\leq \beta \leq 0$ and one solution for $\beta>0$. 

(to do: make figure)

Determining whether a given Hopf bifurcation is subcritical or supercritical is therefore a quite tedious process, by which one must develop the function $f$ and $g$ in Taylor series, and then (when possible) making a change of variables to diagonalise the Jacobian, and then mapping the non-linear terms to the normal form. In practice, bifurcation software (AUTO, MATCONT) can do this for you. Furthermore, criteria have been worked out for specific dynamical systems (e.g.  Kuznetzov, Elements of applied bifurcation theory, Springer,  \S 3.5)

For example, for the generic form that concerns us here: 

\begin{align*}
x_1 &= F(x_1) - x_2 \\
x_2 &= a(x_1 - b)
\end{align*}

(we recognise $x_2=x$; $y_2=y$, $b=0$, $a=1$, $F(y)=y-y^3$), the sign of $\sigma$ is given by $F^{\prime\prime\prime}$ at the bifurcation point. It is here _negative_, so we have a _supercritical_ Hopf bifurcation. 

The above equation is the FithHugh-Nagumo equation, and your professor has used it to study the dynamics of ice ages. 

Below the limit cycles found in the van der Pol oscillator with $\alpha=1$, for $\beta=0.98$ (grey), $\beta=0.95$ (black), $\beta=0.9$ (blue) and $\beta=0.8$ (green). We recognise the (reasonably) smooth growth of the cycle as $\beta$ gets away from the bifurcation point, as predicted by the theory. 

\input{Figures/fn.eepic}

In some more pathological cases, however, the limit cycle may grow quite quickly and reach saturation, even though the bifurcation is supercritical. This is a case of supercritical, explosive Hopf bifurcation. This is found in the above case, but in the slow-fast regime, with  $\alpha \gg 1$. The behaviour of Hopf bifurcations is  slow-fast systems is a field of research on its own, and gives rises to curious orbits termed "Canard". 

The case for $\beta=0.98$, $\alpha=10$ is shown below, for illustration

\input{Figures/canard.eepic}

## Further remarks about periodic orbits

<!-- - closing lemmas
- dynamic averaging
-->
- characterization of chaos (unstable periodic orbits)
- mathematical biology (limit cycles / synchronisation)
- time series analysis

