I am a  physicist specialised in climate dynamics, and I have been working dynamical systems as models of the climate since 2006. My approach tends to be pragmatic, as I am ultimately interested in the behaviour of the real world system that I am attempting to model with dynamical systems. So will be this lecture. The divide between _continuous_ dynamical systems and _discrete_ dynamical systems has been conserved, as well as many exercises and the overall evaluation structure. I have the pleasure to acknowledge Prof. Hagendorf and Prof. Luc Haine for their help and collaboration in preparing this course.

The course programme should roughly follow the succession of chapters, but not quite as some chapters are longer than other. The basis is 10 2-hour lessons (this including 3 spare weeks in the 13-week official program), plus weekly exercise sessions organised by Loic Sablon. 

In preparing this lecture, I have relied on several reference books. Although the current notes are meant to be the formal material upon which evaluation is based, the circumstances are such that writing is work in progress and students are most welcome to check them and provide corrections or suggestions. This text and related material is provided as a [free git repository](https://github.com/mcrucifix/LPHYS2114). Many of the books below are available online, and some can be  bought at an advantageous rate with the Springer MyCopy program. 

 -   S.H. Strogatz, Nonlinear dynamics and chaos. Westview Press (2015).
 -   S. Wiggins, Introduction to Applied Nonlinear Dynamical Systems and Chaos, Springer (2003)
 -   R. Hilborn, Chaos and Nonlinear Dynamics: An Introduction for Scientists and Engineers (2nd edn) , Oxford University Press (2000)
 -   H. Dijkstra, Nonlinear Physical Oceanography, A Dynamical Systems Approach to the Large Scale Ocean Circulation and El Niño, Springer Science+Business Media (2000)
 -  Alligood K., T. Sauer and J. Yorke (1997), Chaos: An Introduction to Dynamical Systems, Springer (NewYork)
 -  Perko L. (2001), Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems, Springer, ISBN 978-1-4612-6526-9 

The lecture is marked by a written exam


Last but not least, I am thankful to students who spotted small and big mistakes and communicated them to me. By doing so they improved the document and made life easier for their followers. 
