## Positive, negative and full orbit

The _map_ or _discrete dynamical system_ is defined by an iteration. We define $x_i \in \Omega \subseteq \mathbb{R}^n,$ and the iteration $f:\Omega \rightarrow \Omega$ such that:

\begin{displaymath}
x_{i+1} = f(x_i).
\end{displaymath}

Thus, 

\begin{displaymath}
x_{i} = \underbrace{f \circ f \circ f \ldots \circ f}_{i\text{ times, noted }f^i} (x_0).
\end{displaymath}

\def\plus{+}

\bd{Positive orbit}
The _positive_ orbit of $x\in\Omega$, noted $\theta^\plus(x)$ is defined by $\theta^\plus(x)=\{f^i(x) | i\geq 0\}$. 
\ed

If $f$ is invertible, then one can go backwards using $f^{-1}$. One can then define the negative orbit and the full orbit:


\bd{Negative and full orbit}

- The _negative_ orbit of $x\in\Omega$, noted $\theta^{-}(x)$ is defined by $\theta^\plus(x)=\{f^{-i}(x) | i\geq 0\}$; 
- The _full_ orbit of $x\in\Omega$, noted $\theta(x)$ is defined by $\theta(x)=\{f^{-i}(x) | i\in\mathbb{Z}\}$. 

\ed



## Motivating examples

### The logistic growth \label{sect:lgrowth}

A simple model for, e.g., demographic growth is defined as $f(x)=r x$. Quite obviously the positive orbits diverge to $+\infty$ for positive $r$ ($\lambda = r$). The idea of _limiting growth_ by a competition or limiting resource argument bringing a demographic limitation is the basis of the _logistic growth_ model:
\begin{displaymath}
f(x) = rx (1-\frac{x}{N}), 
\end{displaymath}

or, rescaling the population mass by $N$, $f(x) = rx (1-x)$. 

This _logistic_ equation can be interpreted as a _discrete_ version of the Verhulst model for population growth, developed under the influence of Adolphe Quetelet (both Belgian Mathematicians). Its behaviour can be surprisingly complex depending on the value of $r$ and we will explore some of it later on. 

The Cobweb construction provides a insightful approach to construct the orbits. It consists in iterating using by reporting the iteration $x_{i+1}$, found on the $y-$axis, to the $x-$axis using the $x_{i}=x_{i+1}$ line. 


\Jupyterimport{Logistic_Cobweb} 

We have here an example ($r=3.2$) where the map converges to a limit cycle attractor. For low-enough $r$, the attractor is a fixed point; for high $r$, the solution is a-periodic and chaotic (will still need to define chaos in this case). These behaviours can be visualised with the so-called _orbit diagram_, which may be understood as the equivalent of the bifurcation diagram in the continuous domain. 

\Jupyterimport{Logistic_orbit}

The orbit map of the logistic model is a _fractal_ : it reproduces itself by zooming over it again and again. 

### The tent map

The tent map is defined as

\mbox{
\begin{minipage}[t]{8cm}
\begin{equation}
x_{i+1}=
\begin{cases}
2 x_{i}\text{ for } x_i < \frac{1}{2}, \\
2 - 2x_i\text{, otherwise} \\
\end{cases}
\end{equation} 
\end{minipage}}\hfill\mbox{
\input{Figures/tent_map.tikz}}

\bcd
By reasoning in base 2 (as computers do), one can see that the tent map produces _periodic_ solutions for all rational numbers, and _aperiodic_ solutions for all irrational initial conditions. For that reason, computing the tent map with a digital computer gives you almost surely the wrong solution, because $\mathbb{Q}$ is a set of measure zero in $\mathbb{R}$. _Hint_: multiplying by 2 in base 2 is equivalent to shifting all digits leftwards. 
\ecd


### Getting iterations from continuous dynamical systems

It is common to map a continuous dynamical system on an iteration to understand its properties, at the cost of some information loss:

- _Numerical iteration_ is perhaps the most common case. The _Euler_, _Runge Kutta_ schemes are example of iterations extracted from a continuous dynamical system. 
- The _Poincaré_ map is the cross section of a n-dimensional continuous orbit onto a lower-dimensional section, typically a plane. For example, the Poincaré map of a limit cycle is a point; that of a torus: a circle. 
- The _stroboscopic map_ is obtained as the sample of a continuous orbit at fixed intervals $T$. It is particularly useful to study synchronisation in forced  systems with period $T$.  
- In some cases, authors have been more creative. We have seen how Lorenz interpreted the behaviour Saltzman-Lorenz by plotting successive local maxima in the $z-$coordinate with the tent map. We come now to another example.

### The Hénon map

The Hénon map (Michel Hénon, Communications in Mathematical Physics, 1976) was introduced as a minimalist dynamical system presenting a strange attractor, reminiscent of a cross section of the Lorenz system. 

\begin{equation}
\begin{split}
x_{i+1} &= 1 - a x_i^2 + y_i,  \\
y_{i+1} &= b x_i.
\end{split}
\end{equation}

\Jupyterimport{Henon}

The _strange_ character of the attractor is related to the fact the way the number of pixels you need to cover it scales with the dimensions of the pixels. 

For a example, for a line segment, the number of pixels grows linearly with the inverse of the size of the pixels. The dimension is 1. 

For a square or a rectangle, the number of pixels needed grows with the _square_ of the inverse of the size of the pixels. Dimension is 2. 

The _Hausdorff_ dimension quantifies this scale relationship. 

In the Hénon attractor, this number is about 1.261. This is _strange_ in that sense. 


## Fixed points and periodic orbits

###  Definition

Similarly to diffeomorphisms, we can define fixed points, periodic orbits, sinks and sources. 

\bd{$k-$periodic points}
Given the iteration $f$, a point in the domain $\Omega$ is said to be $k-$periodic, or periodic with period $k$, if $f^k(p)=p$, and $f^j(p)\neq p$ for $j=1\ldots k-1$.
\ed

A fixed point is a 1-periodic point, $f(p)=p$. 

The positive orbit $\theta^\plus$ of a $k-$periodic point is thus an ensemble of $k$ points $\{f(p) \ldots f^k(p)\}$. 
It happens that the $k-$periodic character of an orbit  develops after a finite number of iterations given an initial condition. This will be the case, for example, for $f(x)=2x \mathop{mod} x$ ($\mathop{mod}$ is the modulus). 

The initial condition $\frac{1}{14}$ ends up in a periodic orbit (show this). 

\bd{Finally periodic points}
A point $p\in\Omega$ in the domain of the iteration $f$ is said to be _finally_ $k-$periodic if $\exists m\in\mathbb{N}_0$ such that $f^m(p)$ is $k-$periodic. 
\ed


### Stability 

Given a metric in domain $\Omega$ (usually $\Omega=\mathbb{R}^n$), we can characterise the stability property of a $k-$periodic orbit.  To proceed by steps, we first consider the case of a fixed point.

\bd{Attractor and repeller of an iteration}

- A fixed point $p$ is locally attracting (it is a _sink_) if $\exists \delta >0$ such that $\forall x \in \Omega$ with $|x-p|<\delta$, $\lim_{i\rightarrow\infty}f^i(x)=p$. 

- A fixed point $p$ is _repelling_ (it is a _source_) if $\exists \delta >0$ such that $\forall x \in \Omega$ with $|x-p|<\delta$ and $x\neq p$,  $\exists i \geq 1$ such that  $|f^i(x)-p|\geq \delta$. 

\ed 

Again, similarly to the _hyperbolic_ \index{hyperbolic} character of a fixed point in a flow:

\bd{Hyperbolic fixed point}
The fixed point of an iteration is _hyperbolic_ if none of the eigenvalues of its Jacobian is on the unit circle. 
\ed 

We anticipate a similar connection between eigenvalues of the Jacobian and the locally attracting - repelling properties of the fixed point, but we leave the demonstration for the next section. 

We just proceed a bit more with our enthusiasm for definitions to define the stability of a periodic orbit:

\bd{Stability of periodic orbits}
For $k\geq1$ and $p$ a point of the $k-$periodic orbit of $f$, the latter is said to be 
- attracting if $p$ is a sink of $f^k$, and
- repelling if $p$ is a source of $f^k$. 
\ed

Similarly, we will characterise the hyperbolic character of $p$ by considering the $f^k$ iteration. 

Finally, we consider the _basin_ of attraction of a fixed point or a $k-$periodic fixed point:

\bd{Basin of attraction}
For an iteration $f$ on $\Omega$, given a $k-$periodic fixed point, locally attracting (a sink), the basin of attraction is the set of all points $x$ such that
\begin{displaymath}
\lim_{i\rightarrow\infty} |f^i(x)-f^i(p)|=0.
\end{displaymath}
The basin of attraction of the _positive orbit_ $\theta^\plus(p)$ is the union of the basins of attractions of all points of the positive orbit, thus the $f^j(p)$, $j=1\ldots k$. 
\ed


